---
draft: true
title: Discussion
slug: discussion
---

import OrderedList from '../../components/OrderedList.astro';
export const components = {ol: OrderedList,p:OrderedList}

## DISCUSSION

------------------------------------------------------------------------

A discussion forum is one of the most basic tools for computer-supported
cooperation among human beings. User A can post a question. User B can
post an answer. User C can view both question and answer and learn from
the exchange. In a *threaded* forum, User D has the choice of posting a
response to User A's question or to User B's response. In a *Q&A format*
forum, Users D, E, and F can post responses to User A's question, and
the responses will simply be presented in the order that they were
submitted. With minor tweaks to the presentation layer, a discussion
forum system can function as a personal commentable weblog.

In this chapter you'll prototype a discussion forum, conduct a usability
test, and then refine your system based on what you learned from
observing the users.

### DISCUSSION FORUM AS COMMUNITY?

A well-designed discussion forum can by itself fulfill all of the
requirements for a sustainable online learning community. Recall that
these elements are the following:

1.  magnet content authored by experts
2.  means of collaboration
3.  powerful facilities for browsing and searching both magnet content
    and contributed content
4.  means of delegation of moderation
5.  means of identifying members who are imposing an undue burden on the
    community and ways of changing their behavior and/or excluding them
    from the community without them realizing it
6.  means of software extension by community members themselves

An early example of the forum-as-community is USENET, which was started
in 1979 and is also known to old people as "NetNews" and to young people
as "Google Groups". Each newsgroup is a more or less self-contained
community of people interested in a particular topic, collaborating
through a threaded discussion forum. A good example is , where people
talk about flying around in airplanes without engines.

In a USENET group the magnet content can be any longish posting from a
recognized expert. Keep in mind that the number of people using a group
such as is fairly smallâ€”most people get nervous in little planes and
even more nervous in a little plane with no engine. An analysis of
October 2004's activity by Marc Smith's Netscan service () shows that
the group had only 174 "Returnees". Thus it will be fairly
straightforward for these core users to recognize each other by name or
email address. A typical magnet content posting in a newsgroup is the
FAQ or frequently asked questions summary in which each question has an
agreed-upon-by-the-group-experts answer.

The means of collaboration in the USENET group is the ability for any
member to start a new thread or reply to a message within an existing
thread. In the early days of USENET, the means of browsing and searching
were reasonably good for recent messages, but terrible or non-existent
for learning from older exchanges. Starting in the mid-1990s, Web-based
search engines such as DejaNews provided fast and easy access to old
messages.

USENET has traditionally been weak on the fourth required element
("means of delegation of moderation"). Not enough people have
volunteered to moderate, software to divide the effort of moderating a
single forum among multiple moderators was non-existent, and the news
protocols had security holes that let commercial spam messages through
even on moderated groups. For an overview of the circa 2001 state of the
art, read . For a discussion of spam in history, see "Origin of the term
'spam' to mean net abuse" by Brad Templeton at , a site that contains a
lot of other interesting articles on the history of Internet.

Where USENET has fallen tragically short is element 5: "Means of
excluding burdensome people." Most USENET clients include "bozo filters"
that enable an individual user to filter out messages from a
persistently troublesome poster. But there is no collective way for a
group to exclude a person who consistently starts irrelevant threads,
spams the group, abuses others, or otherwise becomes unwelcome.

With regard to element 6, software extension by community members
themselves, USENET has done remarkably well. USENET servers and clients
tend to be monolithic C programs where small modifications can have
catastrophic consequences. On the other hand, the average user of the
early Internet was a skilled software developer. So if not every USENET
user was a programmer of USENET tools, it was at least safe to say that
every programmer of USENET tools was a user of USENET.

### BEYOND USENET

If the online learning community that you build is only as good as
USENET, congratulate yourself. The Google USENET archive contains 700
million messages from twenty years. Hundreds of thousands of people have
gotten the answers to their questions, as shown in Figure 8.1.

.

**Figure 8.1:** A December 25, 2001 USENET exchange in the group
regarding mounting a camera on the wing of a glider. Notice that the
first answer comes less than two hours after the question was posted.

When building our own database-backed discussion forum system, there are
some simple improvements that we can add over the traditional USENET
system:

FIXME

More dramatic improvements can be obtained with attention to element 5:
"Means of excluding burdensome people." Your software can do the SQL
query "show me users who've submitted questions that were deleted by a
moderator as redundant" and then automatically welcome those users back
to the forum with an interstitial page explaining how to search and
browse archived threads. If the online community is short on moderator
time, it will make a lot of sense to query for those users whose
postings have resulted in moderator intervention. If it turns out that
0.1 percent of the users consume 50 percent of the moderators' time,
perhaps it is better to ban those handful of users and thereby double
the community's available moderation resources.

As the semester proceeds, you'll discover another advantage of building
your own discussion forum, which is that it becomes an integrated part
of your service. All of a user's contributions in different areas,
including the discussion forum, are queryable from a single database and
viewable on a single page.

### EXERCISE 1

Visit five sites on the public Internet with discussion forums, one of
which can be the Medium Format Digest forum at photo.net (). For each
site gather the following statistics:

FIXME

List the user interface and customer service features that you think are
the best from these five sites and give a brief explanation of why each
feature is good.

### ONE FORUM OR MANY?

How many forums should a site have? Let's consider a site for music
lovers. Would one forum be enough? Maybe not. Will the classical music
lovers be interested in a discussion of ? So it will be a good idea to
split the discussion into at least two forums: Classical and Pop. Let's
say that a Pat Boone fan comes into the Pop forum one day and encounters
a discussion of the lyrics from or an MP3 from ? We'll clearly need to
split up the Pop forum into Christian Pop, Techno, and Rap. We're
expecting a lot of Beatles fans as well. Which of these forums would
they gravitate toward? Maybe we need a '60s Rock forum. On the classical
side there are a lot of grand opera nuts who won't want to be distracted
by discussions about authentic instrument performances of Baroque music.
Sophisticated modern music fans discussing John Cage's "Four Minutes,
Thirty-three Seconds" won't want to waste time discussing the fossils of
the 18th and 19th Centuries. And if we turn our attention to the many
styles of Jazz ...

It would be easy to justify the creation of 100 separate forums on our
music site. And indeed USENET contains , including , for example. That
turns out to be the tip of the iceberg, for the alternative hierarchy
sports , including and . If USENET can support nearly 1000 discussion
forums, surely a popular comprehensive music site ought to have at least
100.

Maybe not.

When discussion is fragmented, it is hard for a community to get off the
ground. If there are 50 users and 100 forums, how will those users find
each other? The average visit will result in a user concluding that the
community isn't active. Such a user is unlikely to return or refer a
friend to the site. Even when a community is large enough to support
numerous forums, presenting discussion in a fragmented manner leads to
extra work for the user whose interests are diverse. Suppose that a
music scholar comes to USENET looking to see if there has been any
recent discussion of Bach's "Schubler Chorales" and their influence on
later composers. That's as simple as visiting . If that scholar wants to
check up on recent postings concerning Celine Dion's "My Heart Will Go
On", he or she will have to scan separately.

A good example of a thriving community with a single discussion forum is
. It is very easy to find the topics being actively discussed on
slashdot: look at the front page.

It is possible to take the "one forum" and "many forum" approaches on
the same site at the same time. For example, look at (static copy at ).
There are separate Medium Format, Nature Photography, and Photo Critique
forums. For a user to browse the new postings in these three forums will
require seven mouse clicks: down into this page, down into Medium
Format, back, down into Nature, back, down into Critique. With a
different SQL query, however, postings from all these very same forums
can be combined on one page, as in (static copy at ). Postings from
particular forum topics may be distinguished with a special
publisher-chosen color or icon. Suppose that the user finds the Photo
Critique forum overwhelming and uninteresting. These postings can be
excluded from his or her personalized unified view via clicking on the
"Customize forums" link at the top (static copy at ) and unchecking
those forums that are no longer of interest.

### EXERCISE 2: DESIGN THE USER EXPERIENCE

Figure out whether your service should have one forum, one forum with
categories, several forums, several forums each with categories, or
something else. Document the page flow for your users (recall ).

### EXERCISE 3: DOCUMENT THE DATA MODEL

Document how you intend to spread the discussion forum data among the
content repository tables that you defined in .

### EXERCISE 4: BUILD THE USER PAGES

Implement the user experience that you designed in Exercise 2.

### EXERCISE 5: BUILD THE ADMIN PAGES

Design a set of admin pages. In this case it is usually better to start
with a required list of tasks that must be accomplished. Then try to
build a page flow that will let the administrator accomplish those tasks
in as few clicks as possible.

Recall from the "User Registration" chapter an important user interface
principle to keep in mind: it is more natural for most computer users to
pick the noun first and then the verb. For example, the forum moderator
might first click on a message's subject line to select it and then, on
a subsequent page, select an action to perform to this message: delete,
approve, rate, categorize, etc. It is technically feasible to build a
system in which the moderator is first asked "Would you like to delete
some messages?" and then is prompted for the messages to be deleted.
However, this is not how the Apple Macintosh was designed, and therefore
anyone who has used the Macintosh user interface or its derivatives,
notably Microsoft Windows, will be accustomed to the noun-verb order.

This is your community and these are your users. So in the long run only
you can know what administrative actions are most needed. At a minimum,
however, you should support the following:

FIXME

### IN-CLASS PRESENTATIONS

At this point we recommend that teams present their functioning
discussion forum implementations. So that the audience can evaluate the
workability of the interface, the forums should be preloaded with
questions and answers of realistic length, with material copied from
Google Groups if necessary.

A suggested outline for the presentation is the following:

FIXME

The presentation should be accompanied by a handout that shows (a) the
data model that supports discussion, (b) any SQL code invoked by the URL
that displays one thread of discussion (pulled out of whatever
imperative language scripts it is imbedded in), and (c) the results of
the query trace.

### USABILITY

At this point your discussion forum should work. Users can register.
Users can ask questions. Users can post answers. Is it usable? Well,
consider that most computer programs were considered perfect at one time
by their creator(s). It is only in encounters with real users that most
problems become evident.  
  

  
  
These encounters between freshly minted Internet applications and first
users have become increasingly startling for all parties. One reason is
the large and growing *user experience gap*. In 1994 the average Web
user was a researcher with a Unix machine on his or her desk. Very
likely the user knew how to write at least simple computer programs. The
average Web page was straight HTML 2.0 with no scripts or other active
components. All Web pages worked the same: you read the black text, you
clicked on the blue text, you were reminded by the purple text that
you'd already visited a link. Once you learned how to use your first Web
site you knew how to use all subsequently visited sites.

The user experience gap has grown larger because the users are less
sophisticated while the applications have grown more complex. In 2005
the average Web user is a first-time computer user and the Web browser
may be the only application that he or she knows how to use. Despite the
manifest inability of these users to cope with a complex user interface,
Web sites have been tarted up with JavaScript, ActiveX, Java, Flash, to
the point where they are as hard to use and different from each other as
old Unix applications. Users unable or unwilling to deal with the
horrors of custom user interfaces have voted with their mice. They buy
at Amazon. They search at Google. They get their information from Yahoo!
and nytimes.com.  
  

![](images-discussion/user-experience-gap.gif)

  

**Figure 8.2:** As the Internet gets older, applications become more
complex and difficult to use while the *average* user becomes less and
less experienced. Source: Mark Hurst, .

  
  

Idiosyncratic ideas make sense for magazine and television
advertisements. Different is good when it takes the user the same 30
seconds to absorb the message. But different is bad if it means the user
needs extra time or extra clicks to get to the desired task. Some
studies show that on each extra click there is a 50 percent chance that
a user will abandon the site altogether.

In mid-2000, Webvan purchased HomeGrocer, a competing grocery delivery
company, and converted the old HomeGrocer users to the new Webvan user
interface. Orders fell by more than half. The HomeGrocer business went
from breaking even to losing lots of cash simply because of the inferior
usability of the Webvan software. Ultimately Webvan went bankrupt,
taking with it \$1.2 billion of invested cash.

How is it possible that people follow what they imagine to be their own
good taste instead of either copying the successful Internet services
(e.g., Yahoo!, Amazon, Google) or listening to the users? And that
people continue to believe in the value of their own ideas even as the
red ink starts to dominate their financial reports? Justin Kruger and
David Dunning, experimental psychologists at Cornell University,
wondered the same thing and wrote up their findings in "Unskilled and
Unaware of It: How Difficulties in Recognizing One's Own Incompetence
Lead to Inflated Self-Assessments" (Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology; Vol 77, No. 6, pp 1121-1134; ). Kruger and Dunning found
that people in the 12th percentile of skill estimated themselves to be
in the 62nd. Furthermore, these incompetent people failed to recalibrate
themselves when shown the range of performance by their peer group. The
authors concluded that "those with limited knowledge in a domain suffer
a dual burden: Not only do they reach mistaken conclusions and make
regrettable errors, but their incompetence robs them of the ability to
realize it."

  
  

<img src="images-discussion/n-users-to-find-problems.gif" width="631"
height="377" />  
  

**Figure 8.3:** Source: "Why You Only Need to Test With 5 Users" by
Jakob Nielsen;

  
  

### EXERCISE 6: THE USABILITY TEST

An ideal usability test involves the following elements:

1.  a test subject whose experience with computers and the Internet is
    comparable to what you expect for your average user
2.  a set of tasks that you want the subject to try to accomplish
3.  a quiet comfortable environment for the test subject
4.  no assistance from the product developers
5.  observation of the test subject through a one-way mirror
6.  videotaping of the test subject's experience for later study

Conduct a usability test of your discussion forum software,
incorporating elements 1-4 from the list above. You should find at least
four testers from among your friendsâ€”*do not pick anyone who is taking
this course* (classmates will have too many subconscious expectations).
Run your usability test subjects in series, one after the other, with
your entire team observing and writing down what happens. Ask your
subjects to voice their thoughts aloud. How long does it take the
subject to complete a task? Does the subject get stuck on any step? Does
the subject indicate confusion as to the appropriate next step at any
time?

Use the following script of tasks (cut and paste these into a separate
document and print it out, after filling in the bracketed sections),
with no extra hints:

1.  starting as an unregistered user at the site home page, find the
    area on the site where one would ask questions of other users (if
    you can't accomplish this task, or any other task on this page,
    within 3 minutes, give up and move on)
2.  read through the existing questions and answers to determine whether
    or not *\[some question that has been asked already\]* has been
    asked and answered already; if not, post a question on that subject
    (registering if necessary)
3.  read through the existing questions and answers to determine whether
    or not *\[some question that has been not been asked already\]* has
    been asked and answered already; if not, post a question on that
    subject
4.  log out
5.  log in with the existing username/password of *\[user/pass\]* and
    try to find all the unanswered questions in the discussion forum
6.  answer the question(s) that you yourself posted a few minutes
    earlier, pretending to be this other user
7.  log out
8.  log in with the existing username/password of *\[admin
    username/password\]* and find the administrator's pages
9.  delete the discussion forum thread(s) that you created earlier
10. log out

In between test subjects, clean up any rows that they may have left in
database tables. If your first subject has a disastrous experience,
consider taking a few hours off to fix your software, add links and
annotation, etc., before proceeding with the second subject.

Stand as far away from the subject as you possibly can while still being
able to see the computer screen and hear the subject's comments. Force
yourself to remain absolutely silent. If the subject is completely
confused and clicking around randomly, let the subject continue until he
or she figures it out. Keep track of the number of seconds each subject
requires to complete each task.

Post a report on your team server at . This report will contain a
summary of what you learned from this test with average task times and
average total time (we can use these to compare the efficiency of
various teams' solutions). The report should contain hyperlinks to
sub-pages that contain transcripts of individual user sessions, what
each test subject said, and what happened. Link to your report from your
main documentation index page.

### DISCUSSION FOR EDUCATION

Recall from the introduction that our goal in working through this text
is to build an online *learning* community. An active discussion forum
might be evidence of a tremendous amount of member-to-member education
or it could merely be a place where loudmouths enjoy seeing their name
in print. Moderation is the first line of defense against postings that
aren't responsive to the original question or helpful to the would-be
learners.

Building more structure into a discussion forum is an option worth
considering, especially if your discussion forum is supporting an
organized class. The Berkman Center at Harvard Law School (HLS) was a
pioneer in this area. The teachers at HLS weren't happy with the bias in
favor of early responders inherent in a standard discussion forum
system. The first response to a question gets the most readers because
it is near the top of the page, so it might be more ego-gratifying to be
first than to spend more time crafting a thoughtful response. This
shortcoming was addressed by writing what they call a *semi-synchronous*
discussion forum. Responses are collected for a period of time, but not
made public until the deadline for responses is reached. The system is
called the Rotisserie.

An additional capability of the Rotisserie is the ability to randomly
assign participants to respond to postings. For example, every student
in a class will be required to post an essay in response to a question.
After a deadline lapses, those essays are made public. The Rotisserie
then assigns to each participant the task of responding to a particular
essay. Every student must write an essay. Every essay gets a response. A
particularly good or controversial essay might get additional responses.
A particularly loudmouthed participant might elect to respond to many
essays.

See for more information about the Rotisserie, to try it out, or to
download the software.

Suppose that your online learning community is more open and fluid. You
can't insist that particular people respond at all or that people
respond on any kind of schedule. Is there anything that can be done with
software to help ensure that all questions get answered appropriately?
Yes! Build *server-mediated mentoring*.

Server-mediated mentoring requires, at a minimum, two things: (1) a
mechanism for novice members (mentees) to be connected with more
experienced members (mentors), and (2) asking people who post questions
whether or not their question has been adequately answered. To make the
service as effective as possible, you'll probably want to add at least
the following: (3) automated reminders from the server to mentors who
have left mentees hanging, and (4) rewards, rankings, and distinguishing
typography to recognize community members who are answering a lot of
questions and mentoring a lot of novices.

Imagine the following interaction:

FIXME

How can you estimate the effort required in building the full user
experience example? Start by looking at the number of new tables and
columns that you'd be adding to the system and the number of new URLs to
which the server would be responding. Then try to find a subsystem that
you've already built for this project with a similar number of tables
and page scripts. The implementation effort should be comparable.

Let's start with the data model first. To support requests for and
assignment of mentors, you'll need at least one table, with the
following columns: , (NULL, if not assigned), , , . To support the query
"who is the currently connected member mentoring" and build the
workspace subsection page for Jane, you'll want to add an index on the
column. To support the query "are there any mentors who should be
notified about a message posted by a member", you would add an index on
the column. If you were to make this a concatenated index on , it would
help the database identify outstanding requests for mentors ()
efficiently for the "be a mentor page".

Attempting to support the open/closed question status display and the
query "Which members have answered a lot of questions well?" might make
you regret some of the data model decisions that you made in the
preceding exercises and/or in the "Content Management" chapter
exercises. In the "Content Management" chapter we have a headline asking
"What is Different about Discussion?" above the suggestion that the
table can be used to support forum questions and answers. If you went
down that route and were implementing the mentoring user experience,
this is where discussion would diverge a bit from the rest of the
content on the site. You need a way to represent in the database
management system whether a discussion forum question is open or closed.
If you add a column to the table you'll have a NULL column value
whenever the content item is not a discussion forum question. That's not
very clean. You may also be adding a boolean column to indicate that a
forum posting had been identified by the original questioner as having
answered the question. This will be NULL for more than 99 percent of
content items. That's not a storage efficiency problem, but it is sort
of ugly.

An alternative to adding columns is to build some sort of
bag-on-the-side table recording which questions are open and closed and
which answers closed them. To decide whether or not this is a reasonable
approach, it is worth starting by asking "In what percentage of queries
will the helper table need to be JOINed in?" When presenting articles
and comments, you wouldn't need the table. When presenting the
discussion forum to a public user, i.e., someone who wasn't logged in,
the discussion forum page scripts wouldn't need the table data. You
might need these data only when serving workspace pages to members and
when serving an individual discussion forum thread to a logged-in
member. It might be worth considering a table of the following form:

As the community gains experience with this system, it will probably
eventually want to give greater prominence to responses from members
with a history of writing good answers. In a fully normalized data
model, for each answer displayed, the server would have to count up the
number of old answers from the author and query the table to figure out
what percentage of those were marked as closing the question. In
practice, you'd probably want to maintain a denormalized metric as an
extra column or columns in the table, perhaps columns for and , counts
maintained by nightly batch updates or database triggers.

Supporting the "initially show only to my mentor" option for new content
would require the addition of a column to the table, where it could be
used for discussion forum postings, comments on articles, and any other
content item. Rather than changing all of the pages that use the content
tables it would be easier to update the SQL views that those tables use,
e.g., , so as to exclude content that should be shown only to a mentor.

Some new page scripts would be required, at least the following:

FIXME

Modifications would likely be required to the following pages:

FIXME

For the purposes of this course, you need not implement all of these
grand ideas, and indeed some of them don't make sense when a community
is just getting started because the number of members is so small. If,
however, some of these ideas strike you as interesting consider adding
them to your project implementation plan.

### EXERCISE 7: REFINEMENT PLAN

Prepare a plan for how you're going to improve your discussion forum
system, including any changes to data model, page flow, navigation
links, page layout, annotation (help text), etc. Place this plan on your
team server at . (If you name files with year-month-day in the
beginning, they will sort in order of creation.)

### EXERCISE 8: CLIENT SIGNOFF

Ask your client to visit the discussion forum user and admin pages. Ask
your client to review your usability test results and refinement plan.
This is a good chance to impress your client with the soundness of your
methodology. If your client responds via email, make that your answer to
this exercise. If your client responds orally, make notes from that
conversation your answer.

### EXERCISE 9: EXECUTE

After consultation with your teaching assistant, execute your planned
improvements.

### TIME AND MOTION

One programmer who has mastered the basics of Web/db scripting can
usually whip out a basic question-and-answer forum in 8 hours. The team
together will need to spend about one hour preparing a good in-class
presentation. The team together will generally require 3 hours to
conduct and write up the user test. Talking to the client and refining
the forum will generally take at least as long as the initial
development effort.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Return to   
  

, ,
