---
draft: true
title: Planning Redux
slug: planning-redux
---

import OrderedList from '../../components/OrderedList.astro';
export const components = {ol: OrderedList,p:OrderedList}

## PLANNING REDUX

------------------------------------------------------------------------

A lot has changed since the . You have a better understanding of the
challenge, which may have sparked new service ideas in your mind. Your
clients have had a chance to see a prototype of the ultimate service,
which may have sparked new ideas in their minds. Your clients should
have an increased respect for your abilities and therefore an increased
willingness to devote thought and attention to this project. Consider
that most computer programmers suffer from profound deficits in the
following areas:

FIXME

To the extent that you've demonstrated that you're a cut above software
developers with whom your clients have worked in the past, you'll find
that their confidence in you has increased since the beginning of the
class.

### WHY YOU ARE TALKING TO THE CLIENT

Recall how much you learned in conducting the usability test in .
Computer science textbooks and RDBMS manuals can teach you how to handle
concurrency, but only observations of and interactions with users can
teach you how to build a better user experience. Your client holds the
keys to the kingdom: (1) content to attract people; (2) authority to
launch the service; (3) editorial power over existing Web sites that can
link to the new service; (4) email addresses and phone numbers of people
who would be likely to find the new service useful.

If you can launch your online learning community before the end of the
course you'll have an opportunity to learn from the first users and, by
making minor changes, end up with a vastly improved application by the
last day of the class.

### CLEAN UP THE CODE

Before beginning the planning process for the rest of the course, it is
worth going through what you've done already in order to (a) clean it up
a bit, and (b) familiarize yourself with things that will need
significant rewrites. Work through every page script, data model file,
and documentation page and ask yourselves the following questions:

FIXME

Fix the small discrepancies and record the large ones for inclusion in
your rest-of-course implementation plan (see below).

### CLEAN UP THE USER EXPERIENCE

With multiple programmers working on a system, it is easy for small
inconsistencies to creep into the designs of various pages. Come up with
a set of representative tasks that are important for users to accomplish
within your application and document these tasks at . Work through the
tasks as a team to see if indeed there are small things that should be
cleaned up in terms of what the user sees.

At the same time look for larger problems. Ask yourself how consistent
task accomplishment within the application you've built is with the page
design and flow at popular public Internet applications, such as Amazon,
eBay, and Google. Remember that it is unique *content* that should
distinguish one Web site from another, not unique interface.

Are you bubbling information up to the highest possible level? For
example, on a page that shows categories of things from a database table
does your application display a count next to each category of how many
items are within that category? Or must the user click down one more
level to find out how many items are in a category (then back up and
click down to another, then back up and click down to another, ...)?

Are you letting the information be the interface? For example, in the
preceding example of the list of categories, does the user navigate down
by clicking on the name of the category ("the information") or must she
click on a "click here for more info" text string or icon?

How much of the screen space is taken up by site bureaucracy versus how
much is available for displaying information? Site bureaucracy includes
such things as identifying logos, navigation links and icons, mini
search forms, and copyright and policy notes. Could some of that
bureaucracy be eliminated, or at the very least be pushed to the bottom
of the page?

### EXERCISE 1: USABILITY TEST LITE

Between the discussion forum user test and the clean-up items in this
chapter, you've cleaned up the obvious problems with your user
interface. This is a good time to do another usability test, this time a
bit less structured than the last one.

Find someone who has never seen your project before and ask them to work
through the tasks in with your entire team observing. Write down a brief
report of how it went at .

### EXERCISE 2: FEATURE GRID

By telephone or in a face-to-face meeting, work with your client to
determine what work must be done before your online learning community
can be launched. The launch can be private (limited to invitees), soft
(public, but not advertised), or public. The important thing is that the
application is treated as complete and presented to at least a few dozen
users.

Be careful of the layperson's tendency to try to pack in as many
features as he or she can conceive. When a site is young, it should be
simple and have few collaboration areas. If there are 30 separate
discussion forums and comment areas, how are the first 15 users going to
find each other? Remind your client that , "news for nerds", has
operated since 1997 as a single uncategorized forum and in 2005 was
serving approximately 250 million pages per month to 10 million readers.

Does a competitive site have lots of bells and whistles? That's not a
reason to delay launch until an equivalently complex user interface has
been built. Are users of the competitive site actually using all of
those features? Or are most of them congregating in a couple of places?

People new to the world of online communities tend to see Launch Day as
the most important day in the life of an Internet application. In fact,
far more users will come to a site in its 36th month of existence
compared to its first month. The only risk is launching something so
terrible that a test user will be alienated and never return. In a world
of 6 billion people, this might not seem like a serious problem, but if
the potential users are, for example, corporate employees invited to try
a new intranet, it may be essential to make a good first impression.
Here are some minimum requirements for making a good first impression:

FIXME

If a client proposes a feature that is unnecessary for meeting these
requirements, ask the question "Why does this keep us from launching?"
Every day the service isn't launched is a day that you're not learning
from users. Every day the service isn't launched is a day that the
client's organization isn't learning how to operate the service.

In collaboration with your client, develop a feature grid dividing the
desired features into the following categories:

1.  Minimum Launchable Feature Set, i.e., things that are required for
    the launch
2.  Version 1.0 (try to finish by the end of this course)
3.  Version 2.0 (write down so that a planned follow-on implementation
    can be accomplished)

Most admin pages can be excluded from the Minimum Launchable Feature
Set. Until there are users, there won't be any user activity and
therefore little need for statistics or moderation and organization of
content. Things that are valuable to the users and client and reasonably
easy to implement should be in Version 1.0. Anything that requires
serious programming effort or that cannot be completely specified right
now should be pushed out to Version 2.0.

Place your feature grid at .

### EXERCISE 3: IMPLEMENTATION PLAN

Now that you've figured out what you're going to do, it is time to write
down how you're going to do it. Write an implementation plan that covers
all activity by team members and the client through the last day of this
course. The implementation plan should include dates for code freezes,
acceptance testing, launch, and any relaunches. The implementation plan
should be explicit and specific about which team member is going to do
what and, more important, *what the client's responsibilities are.* "Joe
Client will deliver additional site content by early May" is too vague.
Better: "Joe Client will deliver copy for the /about-us, /privacy,
/copyright, and /contact pages by May 2."

Keep in mind that your goal is to launch the service as soon as possible
so that everyone can learn from interaction with real live users.

How can you estimate the number of hours that will be required to
execute the tasks in the plan? After all, you've never done the things
in the implementation plan before or they wouldn't be in the
"to-be-implemented plan". The best tool for estimating a new project is
a record of how long it took to do a bunch of old projects. To what is
the new project most similar? Suppose that it took you three days to
build a discussion forum system, for example, and you're asked to build
a classified ad system. Both systems need a comparable number of
database tables. Both systems accept content from users and require some
sort of administrator approval. If built on the same server that is
currently running the discussion forum, the classified ad system doesn't
require any new software, subsystems, or other tools that you haven't
already installed and used. Thus it would probably be safe to estimate
the classified ad system as a three-day project.

Place your completed plan at and email your client(s) and instructors
notifying them that the plan is ready for final review.

### IS THIS NECESSARY?

Suppose that your team is only two people and your client is one team
member's mother, owner of a local SCUBA diving shop. Is it necessary to
engage in such a formal process? Wouldn't it be possible to obtain a
successful result by sitting down in one room and hacking out code,
periodically calling Mom over to look at what's been done?

Absolutely.

Why the emphasis on process then when the teams are so small? It is a
good habit for every software developer to get into, especially as
modern software projects tend to stretch across corporate and
international borders.

Consider a software project from a Jane Decision-Maker's perspective.
Jane doesn't know enough to distinguish between good code and bad code.
Nor can she look at a mostly-finished project and figure out how much
more coding is required to make it work. Jane Decision-Maker is not
going to be comforted by a team of programmers with a track record of
pulling everything together with a last-minute miracle. How does she
know that the miracle will happen again on her project?

What Jane will be comforted by is process and programmers who appear to
operate in a manner that is predictable to them and their client. The
more detailed the plain-language plans, the more comforted Jane will be,
especially if the work has been contracted out to a separate
corporation.

In summary, larger teams require more process, longer projects require
more process, and work that is spread across enterprises and/or
international borders requires more process. Your project for this class
is being done by a small team on a condensed schedule and, ideally,
within the same city as the client. What benefit is there to you from
using a process that isn't absolutely necessary?

One benefit from using a more thorough process is that you'll tend to
impress people a lot more in presentations of your work. People who
conduct programmer job interviews have seen plenty of code monkeys, but
they won't have seen too many who show up with printouts of their clear
plans and schedules and then can talk about how they met those plans and
schedules.

A deeper benefit is that you'll get good at the process and it will
become less of an effort on succeeding projects.

The deepest benefit is that working with a written plan will become an
unconscious habit. Pilots are trained to follow checklists and
procedures extremely carefully and consistently. The plane won't fall
out of the sky if things aren't done in the same order or same way on
every flight, and a lot of the stuff doesn't matter if you're flying on
a sunny day in a well-maintained airplane. Unless the checklists and
procedures have become a habit, however, the pilot who encounters bad
weather or mechanical problems has a good chance of dying. People tell
themselves "I'm being sloppy today because this is an unchallenging
flight, but I'll be careful when I need to be," but in fact the skills
of carefulness aren't very useful unless they are habitual.

### EXERCISE 4 (FOR THE INSTRUCTOR)

Call up each student team's clients and ask how strongly they agree with
the following statements:

1.  I consider the work that my student team has done to be comparable
    in quality to the services that I visit every day on the public
    Internet.
2.  The service that my student team has built is a complete solution to
    the challenges we outlined at the beginning of the semester.
3.  The service that my student team has built is well organized and
    easy to use.
4.  I am impressed with the information and utility available to me on
    the administration pages.
5.  I understand what work has been done, what is going to be done by
    the end of the course, and what is left for a Version 2.0.
6.  My student team has made it easy for me to check on their progress
    myself.
7.  My student team has kept me well informed of their progress.
8.  My student team has involved me appropriately in design and feature
    decisions.
9.  I was impressed by the thoroughness of the user testing done by my
    student team.
10. I am impressed by the clarity and thoroughness of the documentation.
11. I think it would be easy for a new programmer to take this project
    over in the event that my student team disappeared.
12. I am impressed by the mobile phone interface to my service.
13. I am impressed by the VoiceXML interface to my service.
14. My student team is the best group of engineers that I have ever
    worked with.
15. My student team consists of people that I would very much like to
    work with again.

Score this exercise by adding scores from each question: 0 for
"disagree" or wishy-washy agreement (clients won't want to say bad
things about young volunteers), 1 for "agree", 2 for "strongly agree".

### TIME AND MOTION

The whole team working together ought to be able to do the code and user
experience clean-ups in one working day or 6 to 8 hours. The usability
test should require no more than one hour. For a team that has kept its
planning documents, schedule, and client meetings up-to-date, the
feature grid and implementation plan should take less than one hour
because this information is already written down and on their server.
For a team that has let planning and documentation slip, it could be
five hours to restore currency.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Return to   
  

, ,
